workflows/first-ai-workflow.md, before:

# AI-Assisted Development Workflow

## Overview
This workflow describes the process for implementing new features or fixes on existing projects using AI assistance, structured planning, and iterative refinement.

## Workflow Diagram

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start([🚀 New Feature or Fix]) 
    
    subgraph Planning["Phase 1️⃣ : Planning"]
        PlanMode["🎯 Plan Mode<br/>(Conversational)"]
        PlanTools["AI Skills:<br/>- Brainstorming<br/>- Ask Questions<br/>- Clarify Ambiguities"]
        PlanMode -.->|uses| PlanTools
    end
    
    subgraph Refinement["Phase 2️⃣ : Refinement"]
        AgentRefine["Agent: Plan Refinement<br/>Break into Micro-Tasks≤2min<br/>List Business Rules"]
        RefineSkills["Skills:<br/>- Task-Breakdown-Specialist<br/>- TDD<br/>- Feature Flags<br/>- Gradual Rollout"]
        AgentRefine -.->|uses| RefineSkills
    end
    
    subgraph Review["Phase 3️⃣ : Review & Approve"]
        HumanReview{"👤 Human Review<br/>Approve Plan?"}
        Feedback["❌ Request Changes"]
    end
    
    subgraph Persistence["Phase 4️⃣ : Context Persistence"]
        Persist["💾 Store Session Context"]
        EnsureItems["✓ MD session file<br/>✓ GitHub issues<br/>✓ Current task pointer"]
        Persist -.->|ensures| EnsureItems
    end
    
    subgraph Execution["Phase 5️⃣ : Execution Loop"]
        TaskLoop["Repeat for each Task:"]
        FeatureFlag["1️⃣ Feature Flag<br/>(Models: Sonnet 4, Haiku 4.5)"]
        TestFail["2️⃣ Test-to-Fail<br/>(Models: Haiku 4.5, GPT)"]
        PassTest["3️⃣ Pass Test<br/>(Implementation)"]
        UpdatePlan["3.2️⃣ Update Plan File<br/>(Mark task done<br/>Record status)"]
        PreCommit["3.5️⃣ Pre-Commit Hook<br/>(Verify Business Rules)"]
        Commit["4️⃣ Commit Changes"]
        CommitUpdate["Update session<br/>persistence"]
        
        TaskLoop --> FeatureFlag
        FeatureFlag --> TestFail
        TestFail --> PassTest
        PassTest --> UpdatePlan
        UpdatePlan --> PreCommit
        PreCommit --> Commit
        Commit --> CommitUpdate
    end
    
    Start --> Planning
    Planning --> Refinement
    Refinement --> Review
    HumanReview -->|✅ Approved| Persistence
    HumanReview -->|❌ Rejected| Feedback
    Feedback -->|Loop back| Planning
    Persistence --> Execution
    CommitUpdate --> MoreTasks{More Tasks?}
    MoreTasks -->|Yes| TaskLoop
    MoreTasks -->|No| Complete([✨ Complete])
    
    style Planning fill:#e1f5ff
    style Refinement fill:#f3e5f5
    style Review fill:#fff3e0
    style Persistence fill:#e8f5e9
    style Execution fill:#fce4ec
```

## Workflow Phases

### Phase 1: Plan Mode
- **Purpose**: Clarify requirements and scope with conversational AI
- **File Naming Standard**: `.ai/plans/YYYYMMDD-[issue#]-[slug].plan.md` (e.g., `.ai/plans/20260219-42-add-auth.plan.md`)
- **Format**: Simple task list with open questions (see Plan Format → Phase 1)
- **Tools**: Skills for brainstorming and asking clarifying questions
- **Models**: Opus 4.5, Haiku 4.5
- **Output**: Initial conversational plan submitted for human review
- **Self-Contained Prompt**:
  > "Act as an expert software architect. I want to build [Feature/Fix]. Ask me clarifying questions to understand the requirements, scope, and edge cases. Once we have enough context, generate a simple task list in `.ai/plans/YYYYMMDD-[issue#]-[slug].plan.md` with an overview, a list of tasks, and any open questions."

### Phase 2: Agent Plan Refinement
- **Purpose**: Convert initial plan into concrete, measurable micro-tasks with strict schema
- **Transition**: Human approves Phase 1 plan; Human + Agent collaborate to refine into Phase 2 structure
- **Format**: Detailed tasks with Title, Status, Business Rules, Acceptance Criteria, Dependencies, GitHub Links, Tests (see Plan Format → Phase 2)
- **Breakdown**: Each task targets ~2 minutes of work
- **Business Rule Identification**: Explicitly list all new, updated, and deleted business rules per task
- **Skills**: Breakdown-task-specialist, TDD, Feature Flag, Gradual Rollout
- **Models**: Opus 4.5, Haiku 4.5
- **Output**: Detailed task breakdown with clear completion tracking (In Progress → Done sections)
- **Self-Contained Prompt**:
  > "Take the provided high-level plan and refine it into concrete micro-tasks (≤2 minutes of work each). For each task, explicitly list new, updated, and deleted business rules, acceptance criteria, dependencies, required tests, relevant file/directory references for context, and suggested skills to use. Format the output as a detailed markdown plan, placing all tasks in an 'In Progress' section."
- **Adding Skills to the Prompt**:
  > "Please use the following skills to guide your refinement: [List Skills, e.g., Breakdown-task-specialist, TDD]. Apply their principles to ensure the micro-tasks are properly scoped and testable."

### Phase 3: Human Review
- **Purpose**: Validate plan before starting execution
- **Business Rule Verification**: Plan must explicitly list all new, updated, and deleted business rules for targeted review
- **Feedback**: Can loop back to Plan Mode if adjustments needed
- **Context Persistence**: Generate session files and GitHub issues
- **Output**: Approved task list with context stored
- **Self-Contained Prompt**:
  > "Please review the detailed plan I just generated. Check specifically if the identified business rules are accurate and if the micro-tasks are appropriately sized. Reply with 'Approved' to proceed to execution, or provide feedback for adjustments. Once approved, I will ensure session context is saved."

### Phase 4: Execution (Agent-driven)
- **Purpose**: Execute approved micro-tasks using TDD and feature flags
- **Feature Flag**: Set up feature flag infrastructure
- **Test-Driven**: Write failing test first (Red-Green-Refactor)
- **Implementation**: Make tests pass
- **Task Completion**: Move task from "In Progress" → "✅ Done" section in plan file
- **Pre-Commit Hook**: Automatically request human verification of new, updated, and deleted business rules
- **Commit**: Version control integration (reference commit SHA in plan's Done section)
- **Iteration**: Repeat for each micro-task until all tasks move to Done
- **Plan Updates**: Keep plan file synchronized with task progress (see Plan Format → Task Status Legend)
- **Self-Contained Prompt**:
  > "Read the detailed plan in `.ai/plans/`. Pick the first unblocked task from the 'In Progress' section. Follow TDD (write failing tests first, then pass them) and use feature flags if applicable. Once the task is complete and tests pass, move the task to the '✅ Done' section in the plan file, update the status, and prepare a commit. Do not proceed to the next task until I approve the current one."

## Key Principles

1. **Conversation-Driven Planning**: Start with natural discussion to clarify ambiguous requirements
2. **Micro-Task Decomposition**: Break work into small, completable units (≤2 min each)
3. **Human-in-the-Loop Review**: Always validate AI plan before execution
4. **Persistent Context**: Store session details for continuity across sessions
5. **Test-First Implementation**: Ensure quality with TDD methodology
6. **Business Rule Verification**: Ensure human verification of the most important/sensitive logic (business rules) even if full code review isn't performed
7. **Feature Flags**: Safe rollout with gradual feature enablement

## Plan Format

### Phase 1: Simple Plan Format (Before Human Review)

Create a conversational task list in `.ai/plans/YYYYMMDD-[issue#]-[slug].plan.md`:

```markdown
# Plan: [Feature/Fix Name]
**Date**: 2026-02-20  
**Issue**: [GitHub issue link or #123]  
**Status**: 📋 Planning

## Overview
Brief description of what we're building.

## Tasks

- [ ] Task 1 description
- [ ] Task 2 description
- [ ] Task 3 description

## Open Questions
- Question 1?
- Question 2?
```

### Phase 2: Detailed Plan Format (After Human Review & Approval)

After human review, Human + Agent collaborate to transform into detailed schema:

```markdown
# Plan: [Feature/Fix Name]
**Date**: 2026-02-20  
**Issue**: [GitHub issue link]  
**Status**: ✅ Approved & In Execution  
**Model Strategy**: Sonnet 4 (flags), Haiku 4.5 (tests), Opus 4.5 (complex)

## Overview
Brief description of what we're building.

## In Progress

### Task 1: [Title]
- **Status**: 🔄 IN_PROGRESS
- **GitHub Issue**: [Link to issue, e.g., #123](https://github.com/org/repo/issues/123)
- **Est. Time**: ~2min
- **File/Directory References**: [List relevant files/directories, e.g., `src/auth.ts`, `tests/auth/`]
- **Suggested Skills**: [List skills to use, e.g., `TDD`, `mermaid-diagrams`]
- **Business Rules**
  - New: [Describe new business rules]
  - Updated: [Describe changed business logic]
  - Deleted: [Describe removed business logic]
- **Acceptance Criteria**
  - [ ] Criterion 1
  - [ ] Criterion 2
  - [ ] Criterion 3
- **Dependencies**: None | Task 0 must complete first
- **Tests Required**
  - Unit test: [describe what to test]
  - Integration test: [describe scenario]

### Task 2: [Title]
- **Status**: 🟡 BLOCKED (waiting for Task 1)
- **GitHub Issue**: [Link]
- **Est. Time**: ~2min
- **File/Directory References**: [List relevant files/directories]
- **Suggested Skills**: [List skills to use]
- **Business Rules**
  - New: [...]
- **Acceptance Criteria**
  - [ ] Criterion 1
- **Dependencies**: Task 1
- **Tests Required**
  - Unit test: [...]

## ✅ Done

### Task 0: [Completed Task Name]
- **Status**: ✅ DONE
- **GitHub Issue**: [Link]
- **Completed**: Commit [sha](https://github.com/org/repo/commit/sha)
```

**Note on Schema Flexibility**: The fields shown above are the **minimum required** for Phase 2 tasks. You may add optional fields as needed:
- **Code Examples**: Before/after snippets to illustrate expected changes
- **Notes**: Implementation details, gotchas, or edge cases
- **References**: Links to related code, documentation, or architectural decisions
- **Context**: Additional background for complex tasks
- **Verification Steps**: Manual steps to verify completion beyond automated tests

The schema adapts to task complexity—simple tasks may use minimal fields, while complex tasks can include extensive examples and context.

### Task Status Legend

| Status | Icon | Meaning |
|--------|------|---------|
| Pending | 📭 | Not started |
| In Progress | 🔄 | Currently being worked on |
| Blocked | 🟡 | Waiting on dependency or decision |
| Done | ✅ | Complete & committed |

### Completing a Task

When a task is complete:
1. Move task block from "In Progress" → "✅ Done" section
2. Change status to `✅ DONE`
3. Add completion info (commit SHA, link)
4. Update related GitHub issue

## Session Persistence

Between sessions, maintain:
- Markdown file documenting the current plan and progress (`.ai/plans/YYYYMMDD-[issue#]-[slug].plan.md`)
- GitHub issues tracking individual micro-tasks (linked in plan)
- Selected task information for agent continuation
- Clear visibility of completed vs. remaining work (Done section vs. In Progress section)

## AI Models Used

- **Opus 4.5**: Complex planning, refinement
- **Haiku 4.5**: Task execution, quick implementations
- **Sonnet 4**: Feature flag implementation
- **GPT 4o**: Advanced testing scenarios
- **GPT 4.1**: Integration and complex logic

## When to Use This Workflow

✅ **Use for:**
- New features on existing projects
- Bug fixes requiring planning
- Refactoring initiatives
- Complex feature implementations

❌ **Skip when:**
- Trivial one-liner fixes
- Well-understood, routine tasks
- Emergency hotfixes (though consider adding context after)

Commit message:

Enhance Phase 2 prompt to include expected failing tests for TDD boundaries and clarify task details in AI-assisted development workflow

workflows/first-ai-workflow.md, after:

# AI-Assisted Development Workflow

## Overview
This workflow describes the process for implementing new features or fixes on existing projects using AI assistance, structured planning, and iterative refinement.

## Workflow Diagram

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start([🚀 New Feature or Fix]) 
    
    subgraph Planning["Phase 1️⃣ : Planning"]
        PlanMode["🎯 Plan Mode<br/>(Conversational)"]
        PlanTools["AI Skills:<br/>- Brainstorming<br/>- Ask Questions<br/>- Clarify Ambiguities"]
        PlanMode -.->|uses| PlanTools
    end
    
    subgraph Refinement["Phase 2️⃣ : Refinement"]
        AgentRefine["Agent: Plan Refinement<br/>Break into Micro-Tasks≤2min<br/>List Business Rules"]
        RefineSkills["Skills:<br/>- Task-Breakdown-Specialist<br/>- TDD<br/>- Feature Flags<br/>- Gradual Rollout"]
        AgentRefine -.->|uses| RefineSkills
    end
    
    subgraph Review["Phase 3️⃣ : Review & Approve"]
        HumanReview{"👤 Human Review<br/>Approve Plan?"}
        Feedback["❌ Request Changes"]
    end
    
    subgraph Persistence["Phase 4️⃣ : Context Persistence"]
        Persist["💾 Store Session Context"]
        EnsureItems["✓ MD session file<br/>✓ GitHub issues<br/>✓ Current task pointer"]
        Persist -.->|ensures| EnsureItems
    end
    
    subgraph Execution["Phase 5️⃣ : Execution Loop"]
        TaskLoop["Repeat for each Task:"]
        FeatureFlag["1️⃣ Feature Flag<br/>(Models: Sonnet 4, Haiku 4.5)"]
        TestFail["2️⃣ Test-to-Fail<br/>(Models: Haiku 4.5, GPT)"]
        PassTest["3️⃣ Pass Test<br/>(Implementation)"]
        UpdatePlan["3.2️⃣ Update Plan File<br/>(Mark task done<br/>Record status)"]
        PreCommit["3.5️⃣ Pre-Commit Hook<br/>(Verify Business Rules)"]
        Commit["4️⃣ Commit Changes"]
        CommitUpdate["Update session<br/>persistence"]
        
        TaskLoop --> FeatureFlag
        FeatureFlag --> TestFail
        TestFail --> PassTest
        PassTest --> UpdatePlan
        UpdatePlan --> PreCommit
        PreCommit --> Commit
        Commit --> CommitUpdate
    end
    
    Start --> Planning
    Planning --> Refinement
    Refinement --> Review
    HumanReview -->|✅ Approved| Persistence
    HumanReview -->|❌ Rejected| Feedback
    Feedback -->|Loop back| Planning
    Persistence --> Execution
    CommitUpdate --> MoreTasks{More Tasks?}
    MoreTasks -->|Yes| TaskLoop
    MoreTasks -->|No| Complete([✨ Complete])
    
    style Planning fill:#e1f5ff
    style Refinement fill:#f3e5f5
    style Review fill:#fff3e0
    style Persistence fill:#e8f5e9
    style Execution fill:#fce4ec
```

## Workflow Phases

### Phase 1: Plan Mode
- **Purpose**: Clarify requirements and scope with conversational AI
- **File Naming Standard**: `.ai/plans/YYYYMMDD-[issue#]-[slug].plan.md` (e.g., `.ai/plans/20260219-42-add-auth.plan.md`)
- **Format**: Simple task list with open questions (see Plan Format → Phase 1)
- **Tools**: Skills for brainstorming and asking clarifying questions
- **Models**: Opus 4.5, Haiku 4.5
- **Output**: Initial conversational plan submitted for human review
- **Self-Contained Prompt**:
  > "Act as an expert software architect. I want to build [Feature/Fix]. Ask me clarifying questions to understand the requirements, scope, and edge cases. Once we have enough context, generate a simple task list in `.ai/plans/YYYYMMDD-[issue#]-[slug].plan.md` with an overview, a list of tasks, and any open questions."

### Phase 2: Agent Plan Refinement
- **Purpose**: Convert initial plan into concrete, measurable micro-tasks with strict schema
- **Transition**: Human approves Phase 1 plan; Human + Agent collaborate to refine into Phase 2 structure
- **Format**: Detailed tasks with Title, Status, Business Rules, Acceptance Criteria, Dependencies, GitHub Links, Tests (see Plan Format → Phase 2)
- **Breakdown**: Each task targets ~2 minutes of work
- **Business Rule Identification**: Explicitly list all new, updated, and deleted business rules per task
- **Skills**: Breakdown-task-specialist, TDD, Feature Flag, Gradual Rollout
- **Models**: Opus 4.5, Haiku 4.5
- **Output**: Detailed task breakdown with clear completion tracking (In Progress → Done sections)
- **Self-Contained Prompt**:
  > "Take the provided high-level plan and refine it into concrete micro-tasks (≤2 minutes of work each). For each task, explicitly list new, updated, and deleted business rules, acceptance criteria, dependencies, required tests, expected failing tests (to maintain TDD boundaries), relevant file/directory references for context, and suggested skills to use. Format the output as a detailed markdown plan, placing all tasks in an 'In Progress' section."
- **Adding Skills to the Prompt**:
  > "Please use the following skills to guide your refinement: [List Skills, e.g., Breakdown-task-specialist, TDD]. Apply their principles to ensure the micro-tasks are properly scoped and testable."

### Phase 3: Human Review
- **Purpose**: Validate plan before starting execution
- **Business Rule Verification**: Plan must explicitly list all new, updated, and deleted business rules for targeted review
- **Feedback**: Can loop back to Plan Mode if adjustments needed
- **Context Persistence**: Generate session files and GitHub issues
- **Output**: Approved task list with context stored
- **Self-Contained Prompt**:
  > "Please review the detailed plan I just generated. Check specifically if the identified business rules are accurate and if the micro-tasks are appropriately sized. Reply with 'Approved' to proceed to execution, or provide feedback for adjustments. Once approved, I will ensure session context is saved."

### Phase 4: Execution (Agent-driven)
- **Purpose**: Execute approved micro-tasks using TDD and feature flags
- **Feature Flag**: Set up feature flag infrastructure
- **Test-Driven**: Write failing test first (Red-Green-Refactor)
- **Implementation**: Make tests pass
- **Task Completion**: Move task from "In Progress" → "✅ Done" section in plan file
- **Pre-Commit Hook**: Automatically request human verification of new, updated, and deleted business rules
- **Commit**: Version control integration (reference commit SHA in plan's Done section)
- **Iteration**: Repeat for each micro-task until all tasks move to Done
- **Plan Updates**: Keep plan file synchronized with task progress (see Plan Format → Task Status Legend)
- **Self-Contained Prompt**:
  > "Read the detailed plan in `.ai/plans/`. Pick the first unblocked task from the 'In Progress' section. Follow TDD (write failing tests first, then pass them) and use feature flags if applicable. Once the task is complete and tests pass, move the task to the '✅ Done' section in the plan file, update the status, and prepare a commit. Do not proceed to the next task until I approve the current one."

## Key Principles

1. **Conversation-Driven Planning**: Start with natural discussion to clarify ambiguous requirements
2. **Micro-Task Decomposition**: Break work into small, completable units (≤2 min each)
3. **Human-in-the-Loop Review**: Always validate AI plan before execution
4. **Persistent Context**: Store session details for continuity across sessions
5. **Test-First Implementation**: Ensure quality with TDD methodology
6. **Business Rule Verification**: Ensure human verification of the most important/sensitive logic (business rules) even if full code review isn't performed
7. **Feature Flags**: Safe rollout with gradual feature enablement

## Plan Format

### Phase 1: Simple Plan Format (Before Human Review)

Create a conversational task list in `.ai/plans/YYYYMMDD-[issue#]-[slug].plan.md`:

```markdown
# Plan: [Feature/Fix Name]
**Date**: 2026-02-20  
**Issue**: [GitHub issue link or #123]  
**Status**: 📋 Planning

## Overview
Brief description of what we're building.

## Tasks

- [ ] Task 1 description
- [ ] Task 2 description
- [ ] Task 3 description

## Open Questions
- Question 1?
- Question 2?
```

### Phase 2: Detailed Plan Format (After Human Review & Approval)

After human review, Human + Agent collaborate to transform into detailed schema:

```markdown
# Plan: [Feature/Fix Name]
**Date**: 2026-02-20  
**Issue**: [GitHub issue link]  
**Status**: ✅ Approved & In Execution  
**Model Strategy**: Sonnet 4 (flags), Haiku 4.5 (tests), Opus 4.5 (complex)

## Overview
Brief description of what we're building.

## In Progress

### Task 1: [Title]
- **Status**: 🔄 IN_PROGRESS
- **GitHub Issue**: [Link to issue, e.g., #123](https://github.com/org/repo/issues/123)
- **Est. Time**: ~2min
- **File/Directory References**: [List relevant files/directories, e.g., `src/auth.ts`, `tests/auth/`]
- **Suggested Skills**: [List skills to use, e.g., `TDD`, `mermaid-diagrams`]
- **Business Rules**
  - New: [Describe new business rules]
  - Updated: [Describe changed business logic]
  - Deleted: [Describe removed business logic]
- **Acceptance Criteria**
  - [ ] Criterion 1
  - [ ] Criterion 2
  - [ ] Criterion 3
- **Dependencies**: None | Task 0 must complete first
- **Tests Required**
  - Unit test: [describe what to test]
  - Integration test: [describe scenario]
- **Expected Failing Tests**: [List tests that should remain failing during this task to maintain TDD boundaries]

### Task 2: [Title]
- **Status**: 🟡 BLOCKED (waiting for Task 1)
- **GitHub Issue**: [Link]
- **Est. Time**: ~2min
- **File/Directory References**: [List relevant files/directories]
- **Suggested Skills**: [List skills to use]
- **Business Rules**
  - New: [...]
- **Acceptance Criteria**
  - [ ] Criterion 1
- **Dependencies**: Task 1
- **Tests Required**
  - Unit test: [...]
- **Expected Failing Tests**: [...]

## ✅ Done

### Task 0: [Completed Task Name]
- **Status**: ✅ DONE
- **GitHub Issue**: [Link]
- **Completed**: Commit [sha](https://github.com/org/repo/commit/sha)
```

**Note on Schema Flexibility**: The fields shown above are the **minimum required** for Phase 2 tasks. You may add optional fields as needed:
- **Code Examples**: Before/after snippets to illustrate expected changes
- **Notes**: Implementation details, gotchas, or edge cases
- **References**: Links to related code, documentation, or architectural decisions
- **Context**: Additional background for complex tasks
- **Verification Steps**: Manual steps to verify completion beyond automated tests

The schema adapts to task complexity—simple tasks may use minimal fields, while complex tasks can include extensive examples and context.

### Task Status Legend

| Status | Icon | Meaning |
|--------|------|---------|
| Pending | 📭 | Not started |
| In Progress | 🔄 | Currently being worked on |
| Blocked | 🟡 | Waiting on dependency or decision |
| Done | ✅ | Complete & committed |

### Completing a Task

When a task is complete:
1. Move task block from "In Progress" → "✅ Done" section
2. Change status to `✅ DONE`
3. Add completion info (commit SHA, link)
4. Update related GitHub issue

## Session Persistence

Between sessions, maintain:
- Markdown file documenting the current plan and progress (`.ai/plans/YYYYMMDD-[issue#]-[slug].plan.md`)
- GitHub issues tracking individual micro-tasks (linked in plan)
- Selected task information for agent continuation
- Clear visibility of completed vs. remaining work (Done section vs. In Progress section)

## AI Models Used

- **Opus 4.5**: Complex planning, refinement
- **Haiku 4.5**: Task execution, quick implementations
- **Sonnet 4**: Feature flag implementation
- **GPT 4o**: Advanced testing scenarios
- **GPT 4.1**: Integration and complex logic

## When to Use This Workflow

✅ **Use for:**
- New features on existing projects
- Bug fixes requiring planning
- Refactoring initiatives
- Complex feature implementations

❌ **Skip when:**
- Trivial one-liner fixes
- Well-understood, routine tasks
- Emergency hotfixes (though consider adding context after)
